# Deepfake Detection

## Abstract

Deepfake is a technique that can superimpose face images of a target person to a video of a source person to create a video of the target person doing or saying things the source person does. Deepfakes use deep learning technology, a branch of machine learning that applies neural net simulation to massive data sets, to create a fake. Deep learning has been successfully applied to solve various complex problems ranging from big data analytics to computer vision and human-level control. Deep learning advances however have also been employed to create software that can cause threats to privacy, democracy and national security. One feature of Deep neural network is Auto Encoders, which is basically used for image reduction. Usually, the autoencoder extracts latent features of face images and the decoder is used to reconstruct the face images. A deepfake creation model using two encoder-decoder pairs. Two networks use the same encoder but different decoders for training process . An image of face A is encoded with the common encoder and decoded with decoder B to create a deepfake. Now that we know a Brief, In our project we would detecting deepfakes of various forms namely, Facial manipulation, Synthesis and Attribute Manipulation. Current facial manipulation methods can be separated into two categories: facial expression manipulation and facial identity manipulation. And the above methods would be perfomed on a dataset that contains a hidden test set as well as a database of over 1.8 million manipulated images. We show that the use of additional domain specific knowledge improves the detection to an expected accuracy, even in the presence of strong compression, and clearly outperforms human observers.
 

## Introduction

Human beings have always inclined towards art and it can be seen in the form of early cave paintings, to elaborate sculptures and ultra-realistic paintings. As technology improved, we moved onto the very first cameras and to motion pictures.  With the advent of widespread digital computing and digital imaging system, we started working on images and videos on computers. As a consequence, many methods of digital image processing and manipulation techniques were born. On comes machine learning and artificial intelligence into the picture. Now we have more power than ever to create and manipulate images and videos. Technologies like GANs (Generative Adversarial Networks) and AutoEncoders enable users to swap faces, change attributes and generate entirely new faces that do not exist at all. This method is popularly known as DeepFake and is a very innovative and interesting process. 

However, this impressive technology can cause a lot of harm in the wrong hands. Social engineering, phishing, identity theft, circulation of fake news, radical politics and invasion of individual privacy are just a few examples of nefarious activities that can be carried out with the help of deepfakes. Thus, it is imperative that we devise methods to confirm the authenticity of an image or video, i.e. to determine if the image/video is real or generated by AI. In this project, we aim to use Al to check the authenticity of an image/video as it is impossible for humans to differentiate with their bare eyes.

### Scope
 
Deepfake refers to the misuse of AI technology, that allows individuals to create highly realistic fake, or altered videos, images and audio files. Moreover, advancement in technology has made it increasingly difficult to tell apart fakes from real media. Especially the existence of hyper-realistic videos that use AI to show a person doing or saying something that never actually happened. This can and has been exploited in multiple ways to impact society negatively.
Deepfakes are a major threat to our society, political system, and business because they 1) put pressure on journalists struggling to filter real from fake news, 2) threaten national security by disseminating propaganda and interfering in elections, 3) hamper citizen trust toward information by authorities, and, 4) raise cybersecurity issues for people and organizations. Could even be used to start wars between countries, affect election campaigns, spread fake news, and fool the public. Ultimately, disrupting the harmony of the world.

There are of course, positive impacts of this technology as well such as creating videos of those who’ve lost someone close to them or updating movies without having to shoot them again. However, the harmful and malicious uses of this technology are more prevalent over the positive ones.
Moreover, advanced neural networks have made this technology simpler sometimes, even requiring just as much as a single image to generate fakes and more accessible to the general public. This means that not only celebrities and politicians but even ordinary citizens are at risk.
Even more alarming is the existence of revenge porn, which utilizes this technology for the purpose of superimposing images of targeted women to create fake sexually explicit videos which are then passed around to inflict lasting damage on a woman’s reputation.

Although, most deepfakes are created for harmless fun or artistic works. There is a darker side to this. In the political scene, a 2018 deepfake created by Hollywood filmmaker Jordan Peele featured former US President Obama discussing the dangers of fake news and mocking the current president Trump. In a 2018 deepfake video, Donald Trump offered advice to the people of Belgium about climate change. The video was created by a Belgian political party “sp.a” in order to attract people to sign an online petition calling on the Belgian government to take more urgent climate action. In 2019, the U.S. Democratic Party deepfaked its own chairman Tom Perez to highlight the potential threat of deepfakes to the 2020 election. Even non-political people have been used to create these deepfakes. In June 2019, a high-quality deepfake by two British artists featuring Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg racked up millions of views (CBS01). The video falsely portrays Zuckerberg giving respect to Spectre, a fictional evil organization from the James Bond series that teaches him how to take total control of billions of peoples’ confidential data, and thus own their future. Therefore, combating this issue is an urgent issue and must be looked into immediately.

## Method 

## 1. Exploratory Analysis

In order to detect deepfake images it is imperative that we understand how these images are created. Analyzing the working and techniques behind the generation of these images will help in effectively distinguishing fake images from real. DeepFake is created using generative models in deep learning to manipulate the original images to change certain attributes in the image that can make the resultant image misleading. The features can also be tweaked to such an extent that an unrecognizable fake image is created. Autoencoder is an unsupervised artificial neural network that is trained to reconstruct data as close to the original from the encoded compressed data. It consists of two main parts, an encoder that compresses the input data into an encoded format and a decoder that reconstructs data from the encoded representation. Some of its applications include anomaly detection, image denoising, image retrieval. Generative models are a very important application of Autoencoders that we will be using.

Generative Adversarial Networks or GAN, as the name suggests is a member of the generative models that discovers patterns in input data and generates new data instances resembling the original data. GAN uses two competing neural networks - generator and discriminator, to create new images (fake images of non-existent people) with realistic features which cannot be easily recognized by the human eye. The generator is trained to produce an output that the discriminator cannot distinguish from the real, while the discriminator keeps learning to distinguish true data from the generated output. As a result of the two components trying to outdo each other, we obtain near-real fake images. In the exploratory analysis, we will carry out an in-depth study of the working of autoencoders, more specifically GANs in creating deepfake images so that we can potentially reverse engineer discerning features and train our model accordingly.

## 2. Feature Engineering 

Engineering features is an important part of making a model better at detecting fake images. Not all features of an image will necessary contribute meaningful information to the model. For this reason we have to separate those features that are "good" from those which are not. The first part of this process is extracting features, which will be discussed shortly. In essence it is the name for methods that select and /or combine variables into features, effectively reducing the amount of data that must be processed, while still accurately and completely describing the original data set. We take this to a step further. As a next step we classify the extracted features so that we can determine which classes of features are good for our use. For this we do prediction using selected classes of features and compare the outomes. After we have ascertained feature importance, we can use the result to select features from our training images to train our model. In fact we can combine these with other inputs which we give to our neural network model.

## 5. Feature Extraction

There are many algorithms for feature extraction, most popular of them are SURF, ORB, SIFT, BRIEF. Most of these algorithms based on image gradient. The method that we would be using for our project is: ORB. This is a one shot facial recognition algorithm. ORB is preferred over most Algorithms and it is said to be a more efficient algorithm compared to as compared to SIFT and SURF. ORB is widely used due to its ability of being rotational and scale invariant. Also ORB being not patented also makes it feasible for our project.

## 4. Face Extraction

Faces are important features we want to use for our detection of deepfake since most of the deepfakes are made by modifying or switching faces. Face Extraction is one method among many methods for processing images. At first, Face detection is performed using a classifier which is trained on an image dataset consisting of thousands of images with and without faces. The classifier uses the concept of Haar Cascade which is an object detection method used to locate an object of interest in images. The algorithm is trained on a large number of positive and negative samples. Here, the positive samples are those images with faces present and the negative samples are those images without faces present. Once trained, the classifier can then be able to locate the presence of a face(s) for a given image. Once the faces are detected, they are then extracted and saved locally for further analysis.




